Refine Atmos Configuration Handling to Support Imports, Remote Imports, and Configuration Directories (#808)
cloudposse/atmos: website/docs/cli/configuration/configuration.mdx

  </dd>
</dl>

### Stage 2: Discover Additional Configurations

:::important
If the `--config` flag is used, this stage is skipped.
:::

Atmos will search for additional configuration files in the following locations, in order of precedence, and deep merged the current configuration. The first location found is used:
<dl>

  <dt>
  `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable
  </dt>
  <dd>
    The environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` should point to a folder (or a specific file). Multiple paths can be specified, separated by the system's standard path separator (`:` on Unix-like systems and `;` on Windows).

    Atmos will only search for the configuration file in the specified folder. Note that `.yaml` and `.yml` file extensions are treated interchangeably and are loaded in lexicographical order. Atmos will search for the following files, in order, relative to the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable.

    If a path is a directory, Atmos will search for the following files in the directory, in order: (in order from highest to lowest priority):

      - `atmos.yaml`
      - `atmos.d/**/*`
  </dd>

  <dt>
    Git Repository Root
  </dt>

>   <dd>

Reviewer: We're missing a section above this for the current working directory.

[terraform](/core-concepts/components/terraform), then [this is where](/cli/configuration/components#terraform-component-behavior)
you'd specify the command to run (e.g. [`opentofu`](/core-concepts/projects/configuration/opentofu)),
the base path location of the components, and so forth.

> ## Base Path

Reviewer: Please remove the section lower down in the document titled `## Base Path`. This current chapter supersedes that one.

Reviewer: Now, going to revisit `base_path`. Note that all the rest of the discussion here needs to be rewritten to talk about how to find the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` (but is written right now for `base_path`)

---

Once we have the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` determined, we will see a YAML setting of `base_path`. The `base_path` is usually relative like `./` (or just `.`)

What is that relative to when not absolute?

```
atmos --base-path . terraform plan
```

is equivalent to

```
ATMOS_BASE_PATH=. atmos terraform plan
```

T
Decision: (most precise to least)
- If `--base-path` is set (if it's relative, then it's `abs(current working directory)`
- If `ATMOS_BASE_PATH` is set, and `--base-path` is not set
- If [this is true](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/pull/808/files#diff-8b0c28fcf996a3ab96636e7da4845b4235522f4c1d7700896df648183c1eeae5R47), then this becomes the `base_dir` that everything is relative to.
- If we're in a git repo, then it's the root of the git repo
- If none of the above is, then it becomes abspath(./)

If the base path is set to some invalid path, atmos should fatally exit.

Reviewer: - @mcalhoun opinion is that `--base-path` should supports relative paths, but `ATMOS_BASE_PATH` does not

- @osterman believes that they should be have the same way; either support it or don't (but I think we should support it)

When the `base_path` is explicitly provided:
- Relative paths such as `components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, `workflows.base_path`, `schemas.jsonschema.base_path`, and `schemas.opa.base_path` are resolved relative to the specified `base_path`. If any of these settings are absolute paths, they will be respected and treated as-is.

When the `base_path` is not explicitly provided or is empty, Atmos will attempt to infer the appropriate path using the following strategy, in order of precedence:
1. If the current working directory contains any of the following files or directories: `atmos.yaml`, `.atmos.yaml`, `.github/atmos.yaml`, or `atmos.d/**/*`, Atmos will use the directory containing these files as the `base_path`.
2. If a Git repository is detected, Atmos uses the root of the Git repository as the `base_path`.
3. If neither of the above applies, Atmos defaults to the absolute path of `./` as the `base_path`.

> Each setting (`components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, and `workflows.base_path`) is treated independently and can accept either an absolute or a relative path.
> ## Configuration File (`atmos.yaml`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each setting (`components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, and `workflows.base_path`) is treated independently and can accept either an absolute or a relative path.

## Configuration File (`atmos.yaml`)
```

> The Atmos (CLI) configuration is loaded from the following locations, in order of precedence:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Atmos (CLI) configuration is loaded from each of following locations, in order of precedence, and deep-merged:
```

> - The `--config` parameter is the relative or absolute path to a valid configuration file or directory containing strictly atmos configuration file(s).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `--config` parameter is the relative or absolute path to a valid configuration file or directory containing strictly atmos configuration file(s). It has the highest precedence.
```

> - The Environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` (the ENV var should point to a folder without specifying the file name. If it is set, Atmos will only look for the config file in the specified folder). Note, that the `.yaml` and `.yml` extensions are interchangeable and loaded in lexicographical order. Atmos will look for the following files, in order, relative to the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable.
>   - `atmos.yaml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` (the ENV var should point to a folder without specifying the file name. If it is set, Atmos will only look for the config file in the specified folder). Note, that the `.yaml` and `.yml` extensions are interchangeable and loaded in lexicographical order. Atmos will look for the following files, in order, relative to the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable.
  From the current directory:
  - `atmos.yaml`
```

  - `.atmos.yaml`
  - `.github/atmos.yaml`
  - `atmos.d/**/*`
  - `.atmos.d/**/*`
- System directory (`/usr/local/etc/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Linux, `%LOCALAPPDATA%/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Windows)
- `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/atmos/atmos.yaml` (if `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set)
- Home directory (`~/.atmos/atmos.yaml`)

> - Current directory (`./atmos.yaml`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Additionally, Atmos supports `imports` of other CLI configurations. Use imports to break large Atmos CLI configurations into smaller ones, such as organized by top-level section. File imports are relative to the base path (if `import`  section is set in the config). All imports are processed and deep-merged in order, so that the last file in the list supersedes settings in the preceding imports. For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports).

Imports can be any of the following:
- Remote URL (if `import` section is set in the config)
- Specific Path (if `import` section is set in the config)
- Wildcard globs (`*`), including recursive globs (`**`), can be combined (e.g., `**/*` matches all files and subfolders recursively). Only files ending in `.yml` or `.yaml` will be considered for import when using globs.

For example, we can import from multiple locations like this:

```yaml
import:
  - "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cloudposse/atmos/refs/heads/main/atmos.yaml"  
  - "configs.d/**/*"                                                                

>   - "./logs.yaml"  
> - Always use HTTPS URLs (currently correctly demonstrated in the example). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - "./logs.yaml"  

:::warning Be Careful with Remote Imports
- Always use HTTPS URLs (currently correctly demonstrated in the example). 
```

The Atmos (CLI) configuration is loaded from the following locations, in order of precedence, and deep-merged: configurations listed earlier have higher priority, meaning they override any conflicting sections defined in subsequent locations:
- The `--config` parameter is the relative or absolute path to a valid configuration file or directory containing strictly atmos configuration file(s). It has the highest precedence.
- The Environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` (the ENV var should point to a folder without specifying the file name. If it is set, Atmos will only look for the config file in the specified folder). Note, that the `.yaml` and `.yml` extensions are interchangeable and loaded in lexicographical order. Atmos will look for the following files, in order, relative to the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable.
  From the current directory:
  - `atmos.yaml`
  - `.atmos.yaml`
  - `.github/atmos.yaml`
  - `atmos.d/**/*`
  - `.atmos.d/**/*`
- System directory (`/usr/local/etc/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Linux, `%LOCALAPPDATA%/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Windows)
- `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/atmos/atmos.yaml` (if `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set)
- Home directory (`~/.atmos/atmos.yaml`)

> - `atmos.d/` directory form base path (if `import` section is not set in the config) For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos.d`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos.d)
> Additionally, Atmos supports `imports` of other CLI configurations. Use imports to break large Atmos CLI configurations into smaller ones, such as organized by top-level section. File imports are relative to the base path (if `import`  section is set in the config). All imports are processed and deep-merged in order, so that the last file in the list supersedes settings in the preceding imports. For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `atmos.d/` directory form base path (if `import` section is not set in the config) For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos.d`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos.d)

Additionally, Atmos supports `imports` of other CLI configurations. Use imports to break large Atmos CLI configurations into smaller ones, such as organized by top-level section. File imports are relative to the base path (if `import`  section is set in the config). All imports are processed and deep-merged in order, so that the last file in the list supersedes settings in the preceding imports. For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports).
```

When the `base_path` is explicitly provided:
- Relative paths such as `components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, `workflows.base_path`, `schemas.jsonschema.base_path`, and `schemas.opa.base_path` are resolved relative to the specified `base_path`. If any of these settings are absolute paths, they will be respected and treated as-is.

When the `base_path` is not explicitly provided or is empty, Atmos will attempt to infer the appropriate path using the following strategy, in order of precedence:
1. If the current working directory contains any of the following files or directories: `atmos.yaml`, `.atmos.yaml`, `.github/atmos.yaml`, or `atmos.d/**/*`, Atmos will use the directory containing these files as the `base_path`.
2. If a Git repository is detected, Atmos uses the root of the Git repository as the `base_path`.
3. If neither of the above applies, Atmos defaults to the absolute path of `./` as the `base_path`.

> Each setting (`components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, and `workflows.base_path`) is treated independently and can accept either an absolute or a relative path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Relative paths, such as `components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, `workflows.base_path`, `schemas.jsonschema.base_path`, and `schemas.opa.base_path`, are resolved relative to the specified `base_path`. Absolute paths for these settings will be respected and used as-is. 

Each setting (`components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, and `workflows.base_path`) operates independently and can accept either an absolute or a relative path.
```

## Configuration File (`atmos.yaml`)

The Atmos (CLI) configuration is loaded from the following locations, in order of precedence, and deep-merged: configurations listed earlier have higher priority, meaning they override any conflicting sections defined in subsequent locations:
- The `--config` parameter is the relative or absolute path to a valid configuration file or directory containing strictly atmos configuration file(s). It has the highest precedence.

> - The Environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` (the ENV var should point to a folder without specifying the file name. If it is set, Atmos will only look for the config file in the specified folder). Note, that the `.yaml` and `.yml` extensions are interchangeable and loaded in lexicographical order. Atmos will look for the following files, in order, relative to the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The Environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` (the ENV var should point to a folder without specifying the file name. This is mutally exclusive with the `--config` parameter. If it is set, Atmos will only look for the config file in the specified folder), if the `--config` is not specified. Note, that the `.yaml` and `.yml` extensions are interchangeable and loaded in lexicographical order. Atmos will look for the following files, in order, relative to the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable.
```

[terraform](/core-concepts/components/terraform), then [this is where](/cli/configuration/components#terraform-component-behavior)
you'd specify the command to run (e.g. [`opentofu`](/core-concepts/projects/configuration/opentofu)),
the base path location of the components, and so forth.
## Base Path

> The base path defines the root directory for components, stacks, workflows, and Atmos configurations. It can be set using the `ATMOS_BASE_PATH` environment variable or by passing the `--base-path` command-line argument. Both absolute and relative paths are supported. When a relative path is provided, it will be expanded to an absolute path relative to the current working directory, as Atmos executes commands that may change the working directory (e.g., Terraform).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The base path defines the root directory for components, stacks, workflows, and Atmos configurations. It can be set using the `ATMOS_BASE_PATH` environment variable or by passing the `--base-path` command-line argument. If both are set, the `--base-path` will take precedence. Both absolute and relative paths are supported. When a relative path is provided, it will be expanded to an absolute path relative to the current working directory, as Atmos executes commands that may change the working directory (e.g., Terraform).
```

> When the `base_path` is explicitly provided, if it is not an absolute path, then it is resolved to the absolute path relative to the current working directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the `base_path` is explicitly defined, it will always be resolved to the absolute path relative to the current working directory, if an absolute path was not already set.
```

When the `base_path` is not explicitly provided or is empty, Atmos will attempt to infer the appropriate path using the following strategy, in order of precedence:
1. If the current working directory contains any of the following files or directories: `atmos.yaml`, `.atmos.yaml`, `.github/atmos.yaml`, or `atmos.d/**/*`, Atmos will use the directory containing these files as the `base_path`.
2. If a Git repository is detected, Atmos uses the root of the Git repository as the `base_path`.
3. If neither of the above applies, Atmos defaults to the absolute path of `./` as the `base_path`.

Relative paths, such as `components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, `workflows.base_path`, `schemas.jsonschema.base_path`, and `schemas.opa.base_path`, are resolved relative to the specified `base_path`. Absolute paths for these settings will be respected and used as-is. 

> Each setting (`components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, and `workflows.base_path`) operates independently and can accept either an absolute or a relative path.
> ## Configuration File (`atmos.yaml`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each setting (`components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, and `workflows.base_path`) operates independently and can accept either an absolute or a relative path.

## Configuration File (`atmos.yaml`)
```

The Atmos (CLI) configuration is loaded from the following locations, in order of precedence, and deep-merged: configurations listed earlier have higher priority, meaning they override any conflicting sections defined in subsequent locations:
- The `--config` parameter is the relative or absolute path to a valid configuration file or directory containing strictly atmos configuration file(s). It has the highest precedence.

> - The environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` should point to a folder (or a specific file). This is mutually exclusive with the `--config` parameter. If `--config` is not specified and `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` is set, Atmos will only search for the configuration file in the specified folder. Note that `.yaml` and `.yml` file extensions are treated interchangeably and are loaded in lexicographical order. Atmos will search for the following files, in order, relative to the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` should point to a folder (or a specific file). This is mutually exclusive with the `--config` parameter. If `--config` is specified, then the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` is ignored. Atmos will only search for the configuration file in the specified folder. Note that `.yaml` and `.yml` file extensions are treated interchangeably and are loaded in lexicographical order. Atmos will search for the following files, in order, relative to the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable.
```

  From the current directory:
  - `atmos.yaml`
  - `.atmos.yaml`
  - `.github/atmos.yaml`
  - `atmos.d/**/*`
  - `.atmos.d/**/*`

> - System directory (`/usr/local/etc/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Linux, `%LOCALAPPDATA%/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Windows)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> - `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/atmos/atmos.yaml` (if `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/atmos/atmos.yaml` (if `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set)
- Home directory (`~/.atmos/atmos.yaml`)

> - `atmos.d/` directory form base path (if `import` section is not set in the config) For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos.d`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos.d)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `atmos.d/` directory form base path (if `import` section is not set in the config) For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos.d`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos.d)
- System directory (`/usr/local/etc/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Linux, `%LOCALAPPDATA%/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Windows). This has the lowest precedence of all configuration files.
```

[terraform](/core-concepts/components/terraform), then [this is where](/cli/configuration/components#terraform-component-behavior)
you'd specify the command to run (e.g. [`opentofu`](/core-concepts/projects/configuration/opentofu)),
the base path location of the components, and so forth.
## Base Path

> The base path defines the root directory for components, stacks, workflows, and Atmos configurations. It can be set using the `ATMOS_BASE_PATH` environment variable or by passing the `--base-path` command-line argument. If both are set, the `--base-path` will take precedence. Both absolute and relative paths are supported. When a relative path is provided, it will be expanded to an absolute path relative to the current working directory, as Atmos executes commands that may change the working directory (e.g., Terraform).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The base path defines the root directory for components, stacks, workflows, and Atmos configurations. It can be set using the `ATMOS_BASE_PATH` environment variable or by passing the `--base-path` command-line argument. If both are set, the `--base-path` will take precedence. Both absolute and relative paths are supported. When a relative path is provided, it will be expanded to an absolute path relative to the current working directory. This is because Atmos executes commands that may change the working directory (e.g., Terraform).
```

Reviewer: It mostly affects the `terraform-provider-utils` which reads the atmos configs. 

In geodesic we are usually setting the `ATMOS_BASE_PATH` for users.

Reviewer: Any relative path is not compatible with the `terraform-provider-utils`, because terraform changes the directory.

Reviewer: We hope to remove the for the utils provider in the future versions of our components and refarch.

> When the `base_path` is explicitly defined, it will always be resolved to the absolute path relative to the current working directory, if an absolute path was not already set.

Reviewer: This will be setting `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH`

When the `base_path` is not explicitly provided or is empty, Atmos will attempt to infer the appropriate path using the following strategy, in order of precedence:

> 1. If the current working directory contains any of the following files or directories: `atmos.yaml`, `.atmos.yaml`, `.github/atmos.yaml`, or `atmos.d/**/*`, Atmos will use the directory containing these files as the `base_path`.

Reviewer: To be clear, it's the prefix of the filename, not the dirname.

Reviewer: I think `.github/atmos.yaml` and `.atmos.yaml` from the *root* of the repo, but not any subpath.

2. If a Git repository is detected, Atmos uses the root of the Git repository as the `base_path`.

> 3. If neither of the above applies, Atmos defaults to the absolute path of `./` as the `base_path`.

Reviewer: Need to rewrite this for cli path, and when we do, and no config found, then use the default config. I think it would probably tie in to the go:embed file system, but need to look into it more.

Relative paths, such as `components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, `workflows.base_path`, `schemas.jsonschema.base_path`, and `schemas.opa.base_path`, are resolved relative to the specified `base_path`. Absolute paths for these settings will be respected and used as-is. 

Each setting (`components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, and `workflows.base_path`) operates independently and can accept either an absolute or a relative path.

## Configuration File (`atmos.yaml`)

The Atmos (CLI) configuration is loaded from the following locations, in order of precedence, and deep-merged: configurations listed earlier have higher priority, meaning they override any conflicting sections defined in subsequent locations:

> - The `--config` parameter is the relative or absolute path to a valid configuration file or directory containing strictly atmos configuration file(s). It has the highest precedence, meaning it supersedes everything.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `--config` flag is the relative or absolute path to a valid configuration file or directory containing strictly atmos configuration file(s). It has the highest precedence, meaning it supersedes everything.
```

Reviewer: When the `--config` is specified, all other search paths are ignored. It is the canonical configuration location. For example, no paths in XDG_CONFIG_HOME are loaded. We should be able to specify `--config` multiple times, and they are deep merged in the order. The first config specified is the lowest config, and the last one is the highest priority config.

> - The `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/atmos/atmos.yaml` file (if `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set) allows the user to specify their preferences and overrides. It is only superseded by the `--config` flag.

Reviewer: Let's see if there's a go XDG library so we support conventional usage.
https://github.com/adrg/xdg

Reviewer: Note, that `viper` should already support XDG, but we need to verify this.

- The environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` should point to a folder (or a specific file). This is mutually exclusive with the `--config` parameter. If `--config` is specified, then the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` is ignored. Atmos will only search for the configuration file in the specified folder. Note that `.yaml` and `.yml` file extensions are treated interchangeably and are loaded in lexicographical order. Atmos will search for the following files, in order, relative to the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable.

>   From the current directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  From the current directory: (the first one found, wins)
```

  - `atmos.yaml`
  - `.atmos.yaml`

>   - `.github/atmos.yaml`

Reviewer: The `.github/atmos.yaml` maybe should have the lowest priority.

  - `atmos.d/**/*`

>   - `.atmos.d/**/*`

Reviewer: The implied order here is highest to lowest presedence.

> - Home directory (`~/.atmos/atmos.yaml`)

Reviewer: What happens on windows with this?

Reviewer: https://github.com/mitchellh/go-homedir (Archived, so look for maintained fork)

> - The `atmos.d/` directory is loaded relative to the `base_path`. For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos.d`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos.d)

Reviewer: Note, we discuss `atmos.d` above and define it here. There's some incongruence.

Reviewer: We should rewrite config handling to use https://github.com/spf13/viper

> - `atmos.d/` directory form base path (if `import` section is not set in the config) For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos.d`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos.d)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `atmos.d/` directory is loaded relative to the `base_path`. For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos.d`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos.d)
```

- System directory (`/usr/local/etc/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Linux, `%LOCALAPPDATA%/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Windows). This has the lowest precedence of all configuration files.

Additionally, Atmos supports `imports` of other CLI configurations. Use imports to break large Atmos CLI configurations into smaller ones, such as organized by top-level section. File imports are relative to the base path (if `import`  section is set in the config). All imports are processed and deep-merged in order, so that the last file in the list supersedes settings in the preceding imports. For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports).

Imports can be any of the following:
- Remote URL (if `import` section is set in the config)
- Specific Path (if `import` section is set in the config)
- Wildcard globs (`*`), including recursive globs (`**`), can be combined (e.g., `**/*` matches all files and subfolders recursively). Only files ending in `.yml` or `.yaml` will be considered for import when using globs.

For example, we can import from multiple locations like this:

```yaml

> import:

Reviewer: We do not intend to support templated imports at this time. Also, this syntax might change based on viper?

Additionally, Atmos supports `imports` of other CLI configurations. Use imports to break large Atmos CLI configurations into smaller ones, such as organized by top-level section. File imports are relative to the base path (if `import`  section is set in the config). All imports are processed and deep-merged in order, so that the last file in the list supersedes settings in the preceding imports. For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports).

Imports can be any of the following:
- Remote URL (if `import` section is set in the config)
- Specific Path (if `import` section is set in the config)
- Wildcard globs (`*`), including recursive globs (`**`), can be combined (e.g., `**/*` matches all files and subfolders recursively). Only files ending in `.yml` or `.yaml` will be considered for import when using globs.

For example, we can import from multiple locations like this:

```yaml
import:
  - "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cloudposse/atmos/refs/heads/main/atmos.yaml"  
  - "configs.d/**/*"                                                                
  - "./logs.yaml"  

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Note, templated imports of Atmos configuration are not supported (unlike with stacks).
```

[terraform](/core-concepts/components/terraform), then [this is where](/cli/configuration/components#terraform-component-behavior)
you'd specify the command to run (e.g. [`opentofu`](/core-concepts/projects/configuration/opentofu)),
the base path location of the components, and so forth.

> ## Base Path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuration File (`atmos.yaml`)
```

When the `base_path` is not explicitly provided or is empty, Atmos will attempt to infer the appropriate path using the following strategy, in order of precedence:
1. If the current working directory contains any of the following files or directories: `atmos.yaml`, `.atmos.yaml`, `.github/atmos.yaml`, or `atmos.d/**/*`, Atmos will use the directory containing these files as the `base_path`.
2. If a Git repository is detected, Atmos uses the root of the Git repository as the `base_path`.
3. If neither of the above applies, Atmos defaults to the absolute path of `./` as the `base_path`.

Relative paths, such as `components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, `workflows.base_path`, `schemas.jsonschema.base_path`, and `schemas.opa.base_path`, are resolved relative to the specified `base_path`. Absolute paths for these settings will be respected and used as-is. 

Each setting (`components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, and `workflows.base_path`) operates independently and can accept either an absolute or a relative path.

> ## Configuration File (`atmos.yaml`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Base Path
```

- The `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/atmos/atmos.yaml` file (if `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set) allows the user to specify their preferences and overrides. It is only superseded by the `--config` flag.
- The environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` should point to a folder (or a specific file). This is mutually exclusive with the `--config` parameter. If `--config` is specified, then the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` is ignored. Atmos will only search for the configuration file in the specified folder. Note that `.yaml` and `.yml` file extensions are treated interchangeably and are loaded in lexicographical order. Atmos will search for the following files, in order, relative to the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable.
  From the current directory:
  - `atmos.yaml`
  - `.atmos.yaml`

>   - `.github/atmos.yaml`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Additionally, Atmos supports `imports` of other CLI configurations. Use imports to break large Atmos CLI configurations into smaller ones, such as organized by top-level section. File imports are relative to the base path (if `import`  section is set in the config). All imports are processed and deep-merged in order, so that the last file in the list supersedes settings in the preceding imports. For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports).

Imports can be any of the following:
- Remote URL (if `import` section is set in the config)
- Specific Path (if `import` section is set in the config)
- Wildcard globs (`*`), including recursive globs (`**`), can be combined (e.g., `**/*` matches all files and subfolders recursively). Only files ending in `.yml` or `.yaml` will be considered for import when using globs.

For example, we can import from multiple locations like this:

```yaml
import:
  - "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cloudposse/atmos/refs/heads/main/atmos.yaml"  
  - "configs.d/**/*"                                                                
  - "./logs.yaml"  

> Note, templated imports of Atmos configuration are not supported (unlike with stacks).
> :::warning Be Careful with Remote Imports

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note, templated imports of Atmos configuration are not supported (unlike with stacks).

:::warning Be Careful with Remote Imports
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Base Path

The base path defines the root directory for components, stacks, workflows, and Atmos configurations. It can be set using the `ATMOS_BASE_PATH` environment variable or by passing the `--base-path` command-line argument. Both absolute and relative paths are supported. When a relative path is provided, it will be expanded to an absolute path relative to the current working directory, as Atmos executes commands that may change the working directory (e.g., Terraform).

When the `base_path` is explicitly provided:
- Relative paths such as `components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, `workflows.base_path`, `schemas.jsonschema.base_path`, and `schemas.opa.base_path` are resolved relative to the specified `base_path`. If any of these settings are absolute paths, they will be respected and treated as-is.

When the `base_path` is not explicitly provided or is empty, Atmos will attempt to infer the appropriate path using the following strategy, in order of precedence:
1. If the current working directory contains any of the following files or directories: `atmos.yaml`, `.atmos.yaml`, `.github/atmos.yaml`, or `atmos.d/**/*`, Atmos will use the directory containing these files as the `base_path`.
2. If a Git repository is detected, Atmos uses the root of the Git repository as the `base_path`.
3. If neither of the above applies, Atmos defaults to the absolute path of `./` as the `base_path`.

Each setting (`components.terraform.base_path`, `components.helmfile.base_path`, `stacks.base_path`, and `workflows.base_path`) is treated independently and can accept either an absolute or a relative path.
```

## Configuration File (`atmos.yaml`)

The Atmos (CLI) configuration is loaded from the following locations, in order of precedence:

> - The `--config` parameter is the relative or absolute path to a valid configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `--config` parameter is the relative or absolute path to a valid configuration file or directory containing strictly atmos configuration files.
```

## Configuration File (`atmos.yaml`)

> The CLI config is loaded from the following locations (from lowest to highest priority):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Atmos (CLI) configuration is loaded from the following locations, in order of precedence:
```

> - Environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` (the ENV var should point to a folder without specifying the file name . if is set the CLI will only look for the config file in the specified folder)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `--config` parameter is the relative or absolute path to a valid configuration file.
- The Environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` (the ENV var should point to a folder without specifying the file name. If it is set, Atmos will only look for the config file in the specified folder). Note, that the `.yaml` and `.yml` extensions are interchangeable and loaded in lexicographical order. Atmos will look for the following files, in order, relative to the `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` environment variable.
  - `atmos.yaml
  - `.atmos.yaml`
  - `.github/atmos.yaml`
```

- System directory (`/usr/local/etc/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Linux, `%LOCALAPPDATA%/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Windows)
- `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/atmos/atmos.yaml` (if `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set)
- Home directory (`~/.atmos/atmos.yaml`)
- Current directory (`./atmos.yaml`)
- `atmos.d/` directory form base path (if `import` section is not set in the config) For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos.d`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos.d)

> Additionally, Atmos supports `imports` of other CLI configurations. Use imports to break large Atmos CLI configurations into smaller ones, such as organized by top-level section. Imports are relative to the base path (if `import`  section is set in the config). For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, Atmos supports `imports` of other CLI configurations. Use imports to break large Atmos CLI configurations into smaller ones, such as organized by top-level section. File imports are relative to the base path (if `import`  section is set in the config). All imports are processed and deep-merged in order, so that the last file in the list supersedes settings in the preceding imports. For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports).
```

## Configuration File (`atmos.yaml`)

The CLI config is loaded from the following locations (from lowest to highest priority):
- Environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` (the ENV var should point to a folder without specifying the file name . if is set the CLI will only look for the config file in the specified folder)
- System directory (`/usr/local/etc/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Linux, `%LOCALAPPDATA%/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Windows)
- $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/atmos/atmos.yaml (if `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set)
- Home directory (`~/.atmos/atmos.yaml`)
- Current directory (`./atmos.yaml`)
- atmos.d directory form base path (if `import` section is not set in the config) example: `examples/demo-atmos.d`
- Custom import form base path (if `import`  section is set in the config)  example: `examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports`
- Remote URL (if `import` section is set in the config)

> - Specific Path (if `import` section is set in the config)

Reviewer: ~~~suggestion

Additionally, Atmos supports `imports` of other CLI configurations. Use imports to break large Atmos CLI configurations into smaller ones, such as organized by top-level section. Imports are relative to the base path (if `import`  section is set in the config). For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports)
- Remote URL (if `import` section is set in the config)
- Specific Path (if `import` section is set in the config)

For example, we can import from multiple locations like this:

```
import:
  - "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cloudposse/atmos/refs/heads/main/atmos.yaml"  
  - "configs.d/**/*"                                                                
  - "./logs.yaml"  
```

~~~

## Configuration File (`atmos.yaml`)

The CLI config is loaded from the following locations (from lowest to highest priority):
- Environment variable `ATMOS_CLI_CONFIG_PATH` (the ENV var should point to a folder without specifying the file name . if is set the CLI will only look for the config file in the specified folder)
- System directory (`/usr/local/etc/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Linux, `%LOCALAPPDATA%/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Windows)

> - $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/atmos/atmos.yaml (if `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/atmos/atmos.yaml` (if `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set)
```

- Home directory (`~/.atmos/atmos.yaml`)
- Current directory (`./atmos.yaml`)
- `atmos.d/` directory form base path (if `import` section is not set in the config) For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos.d`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos.d)
Additionally, Atmos supports `imports` of other CLI configurations. Use imports to break large Atmos CLI configurations into smaller ones, such as organized by top-level section. Imports are relative to the base path (if `import`  section is set in the config). For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports)

> Imports can be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Imports can be any of the following:
```

- Remote URL (if `import` section is set in the config)
- Specific Path (if `import` section is set in the config)
- Wildcard Globs
For example, we can import from multiple locations like this:

> ```

Reviewer: ~~~suggestion
```yaml
~~~

import:
  - "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cloudposse/atmos/refs/heads/main/atmos.yaml"  
  - "configs.d/**/*"                                                                
  - "./logs.yaml"  
```

> :::warning Be Careful with Remote Imports

Reviewer: ~~~suggestion
```
:::warning Be Careful with Remote Imports
~~~

- Always use HTTPS URLs (currently correctly demonstrated in the example). 
- Verify the authenticity of remote sources. 

> - Consider pinning to specific commit hashes instead of branch references
> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Consider pinning to specific commit hashes instead of branch references

:::
```

> :::
> Each configuration file discovered is deep-merged with the preceding configurations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::

Each configuration file discovered is deep-merged with the preceding configurations.
```

- System directory (`/usr/local/etc/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Linux, `%LOCALAPPDATA%/atmos/atmos.yaml` on Windows)
- `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/atmos/atmos.yaml` (if `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME` is set)
- Home directory (`~/.atmos/atmos.yaml`)
- Current directory (`./atmos.yaml`)
- `atmos.d/` directory form base path (if `import` section is not set in the config) For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos.d`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos.d)
Additionally, Atmos supports `imports` of other CLI configurations. Use imports to break large Atmos CLI configurations into smaller ones, such as organized by top-level section. Imports are relative to the base path (if `import`  section is set in the config). For an example, see [`examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports`](https://github.com/cloudposse/atmos/tree/main/examples/demo-atmos-cli-imports)

Imports can be any of the following:
- Remote URL (if `import` section is set in the config)
- Specific Path (if `import` section is set in the config)

> - Wildcard Globs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Wildcard globs (`*`), including recursive globs (`**`), can be combined (e.g., `**/*` matches all files and subfolders recursively). Only files ending in `.yml` or `.yaml` will be considered for import when using globs.
```

> For example, we can import from multiple locations like this:
> ```yaml
> import:
>   - "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cloudposse/atmos/refs/heads/main/atmos.yaml"  
>   - "configs.d/**/*"                                                                
>   - "./logs.yaml"  
> ```
> :::warning Be Careful with Remote Imports

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For example, we can import from multiple locations like this:

```yaml
import:
  - "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cloudposse/atmos/refs/heads/main/atmos.yaml"  
  - "configs.d/**/*"                                                                
  - "./logs.yaml"  
```

:::warning Be Careful with Remote Imports
~~~

<File title="atmos.yaml">
```yaml
base_path: "."

> import:
>   - "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cloudposse/atmos/refs/heads/main/atmos.yaml"  
>   - "configs.d/**/*"                                                                
>   - "./logs.yaml"  

Reviewer: This is not the default Atmos CLI configuration. 

```suggestion
```

<File title="atmos.yaml">
```yaml

> base_path: "." 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
base_path: "."
```
